Jay's Image Gallery (JIG) 1.0 - Released May 5, 2021

Copyright (C) 2021 Jason Carson - jaysimagegallery@gmail.com

Licensed under the AGPLv3 or (at your option) any later version.

Thank you for downloading JIG. An easy to use customizable image gallery for 
your website. Features include support for JPG, SVG, PNG, GIF & BMP image 
formats and MP4, OGG & WEBM video formats, sub-albums, thumbnails, private 
albums/photos, multi-language support, Google reCAPTCHA, Google maps, members,
comments, JPG EXIF data, watermarks and theming system. Requires LAMP/LEMP 
and GD.

NOTES

A few years ago I created JIG to organize my photos and share them with family 
members on my home LAN. Back then it was a basic photo gallery without any
features. It worked out great for that purpose so I decided to add some 
features during the COVID-19 pandemic and then share it with the community.

I don't have a formal education in programming. Creating JIG has been a small 
hobby project, something to do during the pandemic, learning as I go, so if 
you're an experienced software developer wondering why I did some things the 
way I did the answer is because it worked. With regard to code quality it could
stand to be improved and optimized for maximum performance but it works good 
enough for my purposes. As for security I've done some reading on SQL injection
attacks and login systems and have tried to implement the things I read about 
but since I've never created a login system before I make no security 
guarantees. If you notice any security holes and you know how to fix them you 
can send me a pull request on GitHub and I may use it.

JIG was originally designed to be an image gallery, however I added support for
video uploads as a last minute modification. JIG still says "image" even when 
video is being uploaded or displayed, I'll have to fix that in the future.

I also want to thank all the websites out there that host code discussion forums
or post guides, FAQs and tips in order to help out those of us who don't know
a lot about programming.

DONATIONS

If you like JIG and want to give back you can do so by donating Bitcoin or 
Ethereum. Any and all donations are appreciated...

	Bitcoin: 3EbzChHyXRCb3FpQYYXMVUtk76FJxsHiLk

	Ethereum: 0x4B3BC401CcB13A095c439DBBd8fe2D505B3D73FE

REQUIREMENTS

LAMP/LEMP Stack (Linux Apache/NGINX MySQL/MariaDB PHP) and GD

I have tested JIG on Ubuntu 18.04/20.04 LTS Server Edition and all instructions
apply to Ubuntu. If you are using a different distribution please note that JIG 
has the following minimum requirements...

   - PHP 7.4 (with gd, fileinfo, mbstring and exec support enabled)
   - libgd 2.2.5

NOTE: If you are running another distribution and JIG doesn't work or you are 
running into problems it may be that certain other required PHP extensions need
to be installed. Remember that the instructions provided here cover the default 
Ubuntu Server 18.04/20.04 LTS installation.

INSTALLATION

I'm assuming you already have a LAMP/LEMP installation setup and ready to go...

1) Setup the database (MySQL/MariaDB). Below are instructions for setting up the
   database using the command line interface or with phpMyAdmin
  
  a) Log into MySQL/MariaDB as root then create a database user and the
       database with the following commands...

       i) Log into the database: sudo mysql -u root -p  
       ii) CREATE USER 'username'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'password'; 
       iiI) CREATE DATABASE jig;
       vi) GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON jig.* TO 'username'@'localhost';
       vii) FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
       viii) QUIT
    
  b) Next we import the database. Enter the jig directory and use the 
     following command...

       i) sudo mysql -u username -p jig < default-jig.sql

  c) If you are using phpMyAdmin log into phpMyAdmin and create a database
     called jig then import default-jig.sql

NOTE: Image files are not stored in the database.

2) Edit config.php and enter the required information...
  
  a) Server name. Default: localhost
  b) Enter your database username
  c) Enter your database password
  d) Database name. Default: jigupdate file github

3) Either upload the jig folder to your server or upload its contents if 
   you want to run it in your web root. 

NOTE: You can skip steps 4 and 5 if you're using shared hosting although if 
you run into problems you may have to contact your hosting provider and have
them install the required software. If you are using shared hosting you may 
run into some issues since every provider has a slightly different 
configuration. At a minimum you need PHP 7.2 with the PHP "fileinfo", "gd"
and "mbstring" extensions enabled. When you log into the JIG Administration
section look at the phpinfo section (the purple section) and it will tell 
you all about your current PHP configuration. Scroll down and make sure 
"fileinfo" and "mbstring" are listed, also check that the GD section shows
"GD Headers". JIG requires that you are able to run PHP "exec".

4) JIG requires libgd, php-gd and php-mbstring. Install them with the the 
   following commands...

  sudo apt install libgd3 
  sudo apt install php-gd
  sudo apt install php-mbstring

5) FOLDER PERMISSIONS

   Make the following directories writable by the web server, use these 
   commands...

  sudo chown www-data images/gallery/
  sudo chown www-data images/thumbnails/
  sudo chown www-data images/watermark/
  sudo chown www-data images/originals/
  sudo chmod 664 images/originals

6) PHP UPLOAD SETTINGS

   Your image upload limits are governed by settings in the php.ini file. If
   you don't have access to the php.ini file ask your hosting provider to make
   the changes. Some shared hosting providers will allow you to make these
   changes yourself (If they are using cPanel for example). The relevant 
   settings are shown below...

      Apache php.ini file: /etc/php/7.x/apache2/php.ini
      NGINX php.ini file:  /etc/php/7.x/fpm/php.ini

      Equation: upload_max_filesize x max_file_uploads ≤ post_max_size

        upload_max_filesize = Default: 2M - Maximum allowed size for uploaded
                                            files. If you attempt to upload a
                                            image larger than this nothing
                                            will be uploaded. You'll probably
                                            want to increase this.

                                            Recommended: 10M

        max_file_uploads = Default: 20 - Maximum number of files that can be
                                         uploaded via a single request. This is
                                         the maximum number of images that can 
                                         be uploaded simultaneously. The default
                                         value is probably fine.

                                         Recommended: 20

        post_max_size = Default: 20 M - Maximum size of POST data that PHP will
                                        accept. Ths is the maximum combined file
                                        size you can upload all at once. You'll
                                        probably want to increase this.

                                        Recommended : 200M

        memory_limit = Default 128M - Maximum amount of memory a script may
                                      consume. This has to be higher than 
                                      post_max_size. You'll probably want to 
                                      increase this.

                                      Recommended: 256M

   If you are using NGINX modify /etc/nginx/nginx.conf and add the following
   to the http section making sure it is the same or greater than post_max_size
   from above. If you attempt to upload anything larger than this you will get
   an error.

    client_max_body_size 200M;
  
   Finally restart your web server: 

        sudo service apache2 restart

      or 

        sudo service php7.x-fpm restart
        sudo service nginx restart 

7) Open your browser and navigate to the setup script...

        Example: https://www.yoursite.com/jig/setup.php

   ...and setup your Administrator account. After you do that navigate to your
   JIG installation, select the "Account" tab and log in, then click the 
   Administration link on the top right of the page to setup your image 
   gallery. 

ORIGINALS FOLDER

When you upload a JPEG image with EXIF data, such as a photo from your camera,
GD will remove all of the EXIF data and color profile information from the 
photo, JIG will extract some of that EXIF data, store it in the database and 
then display it underneath the photo, the file size will also be reduced so the
photo is more web friendly and loads quicker, these altered image files are 
stored in the "gallery" directory. The "originals" directory is a backup of all
your image files, it stores a copy of all your images unaltered by GD with the
EXIF data and color profile information intact. To prevent users from accessing
the original image files (which contain EXIF data you may not want people to 
have access too), the "originals" directory has the executable bit disabled 
which will prevent anyone (visitors to your website, and you) from accessing 
your original files. 

HOW TO ACCESS ORIGNAL FILES

1) If you are using a DEDICATED or VPS server then to be able to access the
   folders and image files within the "originals" directory you must make the
   "originals" directory executable. Remember that while the "originals"
   directory is executable these files are accessible to anyone through their
   web browser, it's unlikely they will be trying to access them when you are 
   but if you want to prevent others from accessing them during this time then 
   shutdown Apache or NGINX. You can make the "originals" directory executable 
   with the following command...

     a) sudo chmod +x images/originals/

   When you're done accessing the image files in the "originals" directory 
   remember to remove the executable permission with the following command...

     b) sudo chmod -x images/originals/

2) If you are using shared hosting you must make the "originals" directory 
   user executable using your web hosting control panel. For example, in cPanel 
   you can use "File Manager" to make the directory executable. You can then 
   access your image files with an FTP client. While it may not be the same
   across all shared hosting, in my experience it is the group permission that 
   is used by the web server to access your files, therefore if you set the user
   executable on the "originals" directory (but not the group) you will be able 
   to access your files with FTP while visitors to your website will not.

BACKUP - DEDICATED or VPS HOSTING

1) If you want to backup the entire gallery follow these steps...

  a) Backup the database with phpmyadmin or on the command line...
     
     i) sudo mysqldump -u username -p jig > jig.sql

     ii) Copy the jig.sql file into the jig directory (or copy it to your
         web root if you are running JIG in the your web root)

  b) Create a tarball of your gallery...

     i) sudo tar -zcvpf jig.tar.gz jig/

  c) To restore the gallery extract the tarball and import the jig.sql file
     into MySQL...

     i) sudo tar -zxvpf jig.tar.gz

     ii) sudo mysql -u username -p jig < jig.sql 

     iii) Set permissions with these commands

          sudo chown -R www-data images/gallery/
          sudo chown -R www-data images/thumbnails/
          sudo chown -R www-data images/watermark/
          sudo chown -R www-data images/originals/
          sudo chmod 664 images/originals/

BACKUP - SHARED HOSTING

1) If you want to backup the entire gallery follow these steps...

  a) You will first have to make the "originals" directory executable then
     you can download the entire website.

  b) Use phpMyAdmin to backup the database.

  c) To restore the gallery upload all files to your host. Remember to
     prevent visitors from accessing the "originals" directory by removing
     executable permission on the "originals" directory using your hosts
     web hosting control panel (eg: cPanel).

MEMBER ACCOUNTS

Anonymous users cannot sign up as members. The Administrator must create a 
member account for a user. All member passwords are encrypted (hashed) before
being stored in the database. Logging out on one device will log you out on
all devices. Users are allotted 5 login attempts after which they will be 
blocked from logging in again for 1 hour.

COMMENTS

If comments are disabled then no one can leave a comment and any comments left 
previously will no longer be displayed. 

If comments are enabled for members then only members can leave comments but
everyone can see them (unless the photo is private). Any comment left by a 
member will go live immediately.  

If anyone (members or anonymous) are allowed to leave a comment then the 
comments will also be visible to everyone. Any comment left by an anonymous
user must first be approved in the administration section before it goes live. 
When you log into the Administration panel a little yellow star will appear on
the comments tab if there is a comment that needs to be approved. There is an 
option to be notified by email when a comment requires moderation, you must 
have a working MTA (such as Sendmail or Postfix) to use this feature. The
anonymous comment notification email will be sent the Administrator's email
address.

Any comment can be deleted by the Administrator in the comment section of a 
given image.

Members can delete their own comments from the account page.

CONTACT FORM

This feature requires a working MTA. Emails will be sent to the Administrator's
email address.

GOOGLE RECAPTCHA

The Google reCAPTCHA option, if enabled, serves two purposes. First, if you
allow anyone (anonymous users) to leave comments for your images, it will help 
prevent bots from filling up the comment queue in the Administration section 
with spam. Second, if you enable the contact form, it will prevent bots from 
filling out the contact form and filling your email inbox with spam. To enable
Google reCAPTCHA you will need to create a Google account, then get your 
secretkey and sitekey (v2 Checkbox) from the Google reCAPTCHA website: 

  https://www.google.com/recaptcha/

PUBLIC/PRIVATE ALBUMS AND IMAGES

You can make each individual album or image private so anonymous users will not
be able to see them or access them when they visit your website. Album privacy
is not recursive though. If an anonymous user enters the URL of a private album 
they would not be able to see what is inside it, similarly if an anonymous user
enters the URL of a private image they would not be able to see the image, 
however in the unlikely event they where to guess the URL of a sub-album within 
that album they could see what is inside of that sub-album, similarly if they 
where to guess the URL of a image inside a private album that hasn't been marked
private itself they could see that image. If you want all images and sub-albums 
inside a given album to be private you have to make them private as well. 
Privacy only applies to Anonymous users, the Administrator and all members can 
always see private albums and images.

IMAGE DESCRIPTION

If you click on an image while in the Administration panel you will be given the
option of entering a description for the image. The description will be 
displayed directly under the image in the gallery. If a description is contained
in the EXIF data of a JPEG image it will be displayed here upon upload.

IMAGE INFORMATION

If you are uploading JPEG photos from your camera some of the EXIF data 
contained within the JPEG will be extracted and displayed automatically, if you 
want to hide any of that data click on the photo in the Administration panel and
uncheck the information you don't want displayed. If no EXIF data is available 
for a given image it will say "Unavailable" and will not be displayed in the 
gallery. If the EXIF data includes GPS data, then by default GPS coordinates 
will be displayed and a link to Google Maps will be included. If you want to 
hide the GPS information so visitors don't know where you took the photo just 
uncheck the GPS option for each image. If you don't want to display any image 
information in your gallery then disable the feature in the "General" tab of the
Administration panel.

WATERMARKS

JIG supports both text based and image based watermarks. You can setup your
watermarks in the administration panel, once you do that they will be applied to
your images when you upload your images to the gallery. All watermarks are 
permanent and cannot be removed once applied (unless you're a Photoshop wiz). 
Text based watermarks are limited to 30 characters. Watermarks will be applied 
to both the image and the thumbnail. Watermarks are not applied to videos.

VIDEO

JIG supports uploading video formats MP4, WEBM and OGG to your gallery.

PERFORMANCE

Uploading numerous images with large files sizes can take time, especially if
your server or ISP has a slow connection. Watermarks increase processing time as
well. In both cases be patient when uploading photos and other images, 
especially if you are uploading a whole bunch all at once. If your browsers 
loading animation stops animating the process has timed out and nothing will be 
uploaded, you'll have to reload the page and try again. This usually isn't a 
problem but if you upload many large images or if they are all being 
watermarked a timeout could occur and as a result nothing will be uploaded. 

A VPN can slow things down considerably and are much more likely to cause a 
timeout. If you experience a timeout there are a few things you can try: 
	
	1) Upload fewer images simultaneously or even just one image at a time 
	2) Try connecting to a closer, faster VPN server
	3) Try disconnecting from your VPN while uploading images

Some users of this script may be using it on a VPS with 512 or 1024 MB of RAM. 
You may find this is not enough, if you run into problems uploading images 
please add a SWAP file/partition to your VPS of at least 1024 MB.

THEMES

JIG comes with 5 themes in addition to the Default theme but you can create your
own. I designed the theme system to be easy to use and to make it easy to share
your themes. If you want to create a theme start by customizing the Default 
theme to meet your tastes, then give it a name and download it. Next reset the 
theme you just modified. Finally upload the new theme and you will now be able
to select the theme for use in your image gallery. You can share theme files on
the Internet so hopefully you will find a color scheme that is pleasing to your
eyes. If you create a new theme and want to share it with the community you can
email it to me.

LANGUAGES

By default JIG runs in English, but I have included Google translated
French and Spanish language files (so please forgive any mistranslation). You
can change the language by selecting the "General" tab in the administration
panel. It's easy to add a new language. If you want to use a different language
take the english.php language file and translate all entries to whatever 
language you want to use then rename the file, so for example if you translate
everything into German rename the file deutsche.php and then upload it to the
language directory, it will automatically be available as a language option in
the "General" tab. If you do create a language file be careful, some of the 
translations include variables (beginning with $) and HTML code and they must
remain in the translation. If you create a language file and want to share it 
with the community you can email it to me.

MOBILE

JIG works best on your mobile device if you hold your device in landscape
mode (lengthwise, remember to enable rotation on your device) otherwise your
experience may be subpar as the text may be too small or you'll have to zoom 
in/out and scroll left/right.

CREDIT WHERE CREDIT IS DUE

JIG wouldn't work without some help. The following 4 components are bundled 
with JIG. They are licensed under the MIT, MIT, OFL and LGPL licenses 
respectively. 

1) RECAPTCHALIB

The recaptchalib.php file is a PHP library that handles calling reCAPTCHA. It 
has been distributed by Google and is licensed under the MIT license. See the 
top of the recaptchalib.php file for more information. I did not modify it.

2) JQUERY 3.5.1

The jquery351.js file is distributed by the OpenJS Foundation and is licensed 
under the MIT license. See the MIT file for more details. I did not modify it.

3) INCONSOLATA FONT

The Inconsolata font included with this project was created by Raph Levien and
is licensed under the SIL OFL 1.1, see the OFL file for further details. This 
is the font used for text based watermarks. I did not modify it.

4) ICONS

All the icons used in this project are part of the Crystal set of icons and 
where created by Everaldo Coelho. They are licensed under the LGPL 2.1, or 
(at your option) any later version. See the LGPL file for further details. 
Some of these icons have been modified.

LICENSE

Jay's Image Gallery (JIG) - A simple image gallery for your website.

Copyright (C) 2021  Jason Carson

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
